Here are a few life hacks/ tricks I follow/ try to follow to make life simpler, ordered.

1. **No push news.** I have not watched TV news for around 6-7 years. So some things were news to me (pun intended)- like last night the PM declared demonetization of certain currencies, etc. Overall though, it has saved me a lot of anxiety. As Kanhemann says in Thinking Fast and Slow, bad news are more popular than good ones and get more brodcast time. As a result the world appeard bleak. Steven Pinker demonstrates with data that at macro levels the world is certainly getting better. Instead, I pull news from e-papers, etc. Again, there as well it is more negative than positive, but at least you have a control over what you pull- rather than some items getting bombarded at you.

2. **No TV during meals.** We have associative memories. And that is why some adverisements are targetted at some basic functions, ideas- sex, babies, kids, sportspersons. Eating is a basic function and if we watch TV while eating, I have a hypothesis that we inherantly are associating a life preserving activity of eating with something which is not essential. (This is like the idea of habit stacking from Atomic Habits.)

3. **Same patterned pairs of socks of a given color.** I have a few colors of trousers, pants, jeans and corresponding colors of socks- blue, blackm brown, grey, etc. Now suppose I have 5 pairs of blue socks, all of different pattern/ design, then picking them up for wearing unnecessarily takes mind space. And if you are in a hurry, it causes irritation. Instead if I have 10 blue socks of same pattern, picking any two is fine. The idea is like Feynman always having chocolate ice cream as the desert, grey hoodies of Zukerberg, etc.

4. **No digital streaming media after 10.30pm.** Kindle books ok. This helps reduce the blue/white LED light and it reduces late nights.

5. Browse sites like twitter using web browser; **uninstall the app.**

6. **No multitasking, background threads.** I at times have TV running in the background while I am doing something else. I would like to reduce that. Music is ok I think while doing the chores. But if you are watching TV, watch TV. In fact sometimes, while watching a movie on TV, I have played sudoku on phone/ iPad. It reduces both activities to half-hearted manner. This is bad. It needs to stop.

7. Thinking of trying out these things- No breakfast Tuesday. Sort of an incremental goal. Complete fasting without eating anything looks extreme to me at the moment. Also, full day something may be difficult; so, here a day means a significant part of the day (first/second half of the day, etc). Similarly, no media/ TV Thursday, etc. I used to follow occassional no-talk day. Haven't done that for years now. Should try. Talking is such a drain on energy. Some ideas around this: raw food day (fruits, sprouts, no preservatives), looong-walk-alone-and-without-music day (say, 1st Saturday of the month), phone-call-with-out-of-touch-friends day, etc. I have seen some people taking breaks from twitter, going for vipassana medidation retreat, etc. for detox. This is a shorter/ incremental version towards that. Setting up calendar reminders helps here in my experience.