---
title: "Short Takes"
date: "2024-04-04"
categories: 
  - "notes"
tags: 
  - "technical-reading"
  - thoughts
  - concepts
  - models
---

Here I plan to write about some concepts, phrases, models, ideas related to my work and life. As these are likely to be known to many, the idea is to just document these together, rather than go into details of these. Will keep updating.

1. **DRY [Don't Repeat Yourself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don't_repeat_yourself)**
   This principle has been used and abused a lot. The idioms which sound catchy are retained more. For example, why doesn't a stitch in time save ten? Also succinctly put idioms are more popular. For example, you don't have to- as Wodehouse does- explain that- 'An apple a day, if well aimed, keeps the doctor away'. `:laughing:` 
   Anyway, Martin Fowler documents 'Duplicated Code' as a code smell. DRY suggests not repeating some information, code, logic, etc. This is good advice in general but to extract some 'duplicated' code/logic may result into coupling. And as the code evolves, it may become difficult to maintain. So, after taking advice from talks/ discussions, I think that it's better to not repeat yourself within a bounded context. But if the same information is needed outside the boundaries, it's fine to repeat it in respective contexts. It is better to evolve and maintain that way. 
2. **Follow the money**
   If you understand what motivates people, then you understand a lot of what they do. I was once told to ask myself 'why do I do what I do'. Follow the money (trail) was the advice given to Bob Woodword during Watergate as per the film. When it comes to IT, as someone tweeted, a shocking amount of irritating behavior can be explained by "this person is trying to demonstrate their value". As my experience grew, I came to dislike a lot of agile/ process consultant folks. During a phase I wondered why would someone- who had good experience- propagate dogmas like DRY, 100% test coverage, you 'must' write tests first, etc. Then when I sort of understood the motivations I was able to put things into perspective. I used the wording 'sort of' in the previous sentence as I don't think you can fully understand others. Anyway, this model- money here stands for motivation- can help us understand the why part behind a lot of things. Again, for balance, don't read too much into it. People and their actions are sometimes rational and, some other times, irrational.
3. **Entropy**
   The concept of entropy is from the second law of thermodynamics. And it is equally applicable at other places. When thinking about a system, it is good to know that all systems tend towards disorder (high entropy thermal equilibrium). You need to do work to keep the system in order. This work needs to come from outside the system. Also related to the second law is Carnot's principle, which says that there are inherent losses in a system. If you put in 100 units of work, you will see less than 100 units worth of output- never equal to or more than 100. This is why a car left on its own will acquire rust. You need to maintain it by putting in some work. And it feels like you put more work and get less bang for the buck. Same goes for software systems, projects, career. And same goes for health. And for relationships. 
4. **80-20 rule [Pareto Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_principle)** 
   20% of work takes 80% of efforts.
5. **[Power Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_law)**
   A variant causes seemingly disproportionate impact. Man reaching Mauritius caused extintion of the Dodo.
6. **[Peter Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_principle)**
   People performing a better role at a level get promoted to higher level where they are not as competent. This is generally accepted as true. But again this is to be taken not as a rule but more as a rule of thumb. Many people at higher levels are actually competent.
7. **[Conway's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_law)**
   Organizations which design systems are constrained to produce designs which are copies of the communication structures of these organizations. In my experience, this is always valid.
8. **[Normal Distribution/ Bell Curve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution)**
   Every normal distribution is a version of the standard normal distribution, with some standard deviation and mean. This is why, we will hire only the best candidates generally does not make sense. Even if you hire the best, there will be some who are within bounds of certain sigma value and others beyond those bounds. Need to read more.
9. **[Sunk Cost and Sunk cost fallacy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunk_cost)**
10. **[Spontaneous order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spontaneous_order)** 
    Self organization appears to emerge out of seeming chaos.
11. **[Tragedy of the commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons)**
   "Free access and unrestricted demand for a finite resource ultimately reduces the resource through over-exploitation, temporarily or permanently. This occurs because the benefits of exploitation accrue to individuals or groups, each of whom is motivated to maximize use of the resource to the point in which they become reliant on it, while the costs of the exploitation are borne by all those to whom the resource is available."
12. My approach to Sci-Fi literature and movies is that of un-interest and disinterest. I cannot stand (now) the Independence Day kind of non-sense. Generally speaking. There are quite a few things I actively avoid: people who talk a lot, and talk a lot of non-sense, for example. Fantasy literature (It should interest me. But somehow I don't find time to spend on it.). Also, Western (and for that matter Indian) horror movies, books, etc. First of all their ideas and concepts of what horror and negativity is, are somewhat different from my own frames. (Well, maybe negativity, at the base level, is same; but its outward expressions are different for me from the US horror movies.) If you think about it, these things cannot be totally out of the world. They can be only expansions and extensions of target audience's already held beliefs. (ooo... did you feel a cold draft? maybe it's ancient burial ground there, etc.) Same goes for sci-fi. There can't be something totally ground breaking (in terms of concepts) in entertainment as long as it's targeted towards a mass audience. They have to find a common denominator and expand it a bit. For example, I liked the movie Avatar (I have seen only the first one). But again it was great in terms of presentation. But it was still a concept of living in harmony with your connected system that is generally found on the earth in humans (and maybe only in moral, religious minds). Why do aliens have to have legs, weapons of mass destruction, why do they have to reproduce? We have taken some concepts of limited resources/ natural selection/ growth and projected them onto fiction. Suppose we find an Earth-like hospitable planet in the Goldilocks Zone and we introduce life there starting with unicellular beings. We can say with almost 100% certainty that after a few billion years even a carbon, water, oxygen based life there wouldn't have gone through similar progression as that on the Earth (There may not be fish, woods, dinosaurs, girls there.). That's why a lot of times these new sci-fi ideas take hold first in book/ comics form and then are targeted at wider audience via films. Of course, there are quite good movies. My favorite ones- not in terms of presentation alone but content as well (for example, Inception was very well presented but still a small concept) are Contact, Matrix, 2001-A space odyssey, Arrival, Alien, Aliens, Eternal sunshine of..., Super 8, ET, etc. I must have forgotten many. For example, I remember I liked 12 monkeys, AI but haven't seen them in a long time. I loved books like H2G2 series, Ender's game, Contact. I purchased but did not read Dune. Anyway, it seems that they will release [Alien in theaters](https://twitter.com/TheSpaceshipper/status/1780663821352263975) on its 45th anniversary. I would watch it on the big screen if they release it in India. The first and second are a couple of the best sci fi horror movies, IMO. Here's [the trailer for the first one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jQ5lPt9edzQ). And here is [a little play on its tagline](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IuPWsnioD5g). The clip as most QI discussions goes here and there but Rich Hall's comment is pure genius.
13. 