---
title: "Quotes"
date: "2024-05-13"
last_modified_at: 2024-10-30T00:00:01-00:00
tags: 
  - thoughts
  - quotes
---

1. In nature there are neither rewards nor punishments; there are consequences.
   1. As you sow, so shall you reap.
2. Child is father of the man. Wordsworth
   1. *Boy* is father of the man. Wodehouse, who else?
3. Don't make me hate you. Loving you is painful enough. Fleabag season 1 Recent re-watch.
4. Let's see now. What was Naoko talking about that day? Of course, the field well. Norwegian Wood.
5. Do unto others as you would have others do unto you.
6. The heart has its reasons which reason knows nothing of. Pascal
   1. It is not always rational, is it?
7. Humor gives you a sense of proportion. P. L. Deshpande
   1. Humor is the most liberating force. P. L. Deshpande
8. For of all sad words of tongue or pen, The saddest are these: 'It might have been!' Whittier
9.  The fact that an opinion has been widely held is no evidence whatever that it is not utterly absurd. Bertrand Russell
10. When you reach there, there is nothing there there. (This is how I remember the quote.)
11. You must be the change you wish to see in the world. Gandhi
12. There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which taken at the flood, leads on to fortune. Omitted, all the voyage of their life is bound in shallows and in miseries. On such a full sea are we now afloat. And we must take the current when it serves, or lose our ventures. Shakespeare
13. Most people overestimate what they can do in one year and underestimate what they can do in ten years. Bill Gates
14. The first principle is that you must not fool yourself and you are the easiest person to fool. Feynman
15. Of all forms of caution, caution in love is perhaps the most fatal to true happiness. Bertrand Russell
16. That's the wise thrush; he sings each song twice over, lest you should think he never could recapture the first fine careless rapture! Browning
17. Fear follows crime and is its punishment. Voltaire
    1. Till recently, I thought it was from the novel.
18. Our life is frittered away by detail... simplify, simplify. Thoreau
    1. Sounds great. And I agree with Simplify...Simplify thing. But what do you identify as detail?
19. He wears a mask, and his face grows to fit it. Orwell
    1. I have come across a few similar quotes. (Atticus Finch comes first to mind. "Atticus Finch is the same in his house as he is on the public streets.")
    2. No man for any considerable period can wear one face to himself and another to the multitude without finally getting bewildered as to which may be true. - Recently I came across a variant of this Nathaneil Hawthorne quote in Sopranos.
20. All movements go too far. Bertrand Russel
21. Most people can learn a lot more than they think they can. Elon Musk
22. Don’t let someone change who you are, to become what they need. (found on pinterest)
23. Truth is everybody is going to hurt you; you just gotta find the ones worth suffering for. Bob Marley
    1.  It is kind of weird that the people you wish wouldn't hurt you are the ones who hurt you deeply. The family, close friends, etc. The people you went out of your way to make comfortable are likely to be the people who cause you most discomfort. 
24. [I will never understand people. They are the worst.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJXejD_FEXs)
25. You’re an interesting species. An interesting mix. You’re capable of such beautiful dreams, and such horrible nightmares. Contact movie
26. Prediction is very difficult, especially if it's about the future.- Neils Bohr
27. If you're thinking without writing, you only think you're thinking.- Leslie Lamport
28. A person's success in life is determined by having a high minimum, not a high maximum. If you can do something really well but there are other things at which you're failing, the latter will hold you back. But if almost everything you do is up there, then you've got a good life. And so I try to learn how to get through things that others find unpleasant.- Donald Knuth