---
title: "Random Non Tech Rambling: 1"
date: "2024-10-06"
last_modified_at: 2024-10-06T00:00:01-00:00
---
Last night I read [this article](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/oct/05/the-blogosphere-is-in-full-bloom-the-rest-of-the-internet-has-wilted-dave-winer). I disagree with some of it. I used to read Dave Winer's blog. Certainly not for people him but for many average Joes the blogosphere is not thriving. I don't even mean it's not thriving for first class citizens of blogosphere (I hate the words like blogosphere, twitterati) like Dave Winer or even second or third class citizens. 

Recently, a blog post went somewhat viral. It talked about [why even after 15 years the author kept blogging](https://www.jonashietala.se/blog/2024/09/25/why_i_still_blog_after_15_years/). I have been writing blog like things for more than that. And the reasons why I write are similar- think clear, think better, flesh out ideas, get it into concrete shape than vague thoughts cluttering your brain, publishing as a positve pressure, etc. Well, as long as people have some intrinsic motivation, they'd write blogs, click wildlife photos, play guitars and pianos, etc. Of course, things may not be 100% intrinsic. For me, having a reader like you helps continue this. You have no idea how thankful I am for that. 

Anyway, my point is not that blogs are dead for writers who continue to write... even though some writers have turned to newletters. It is VERY difficult to write... And at some point you run out of ideas, motivation, topics to write. I guess it must be so even for creating a youtube video. My point is that blogs are mostly dead for readers. Poeple turned to twitter bites, tiktok and youtube. When it launched, Vic Gundotra had called the first iPad as great device for content consumption. So I think the term must be older than that. But with algorithms optimised for recommending content based on your likes, watch history, etc., the descovery of content is messed up. Blogs had links which took you down the rabbithole. So even with blogs the likelihood of the next link you clicked being related to one you were reading was high. But with primarily multimedia content, it somehow feels very targetted and intrusive. And with monetisation as primary driver of content creation, consumption, it feels you are a consumer. Imagine having VR glasses which pause the advertisement video while you blink and not having to an option to opt out or have a right to say no.

There is serendipitous discovery aspect as well. I mean I could discover good content on youtube just because the recommedation system pushed it onto me. But with old internet (linked pages) and blogs/ wikipedia, it felt that I 'discovered' something rather than something was pushed onto me. These days, when I read a blog post, very likely it is from a blog which is very specific to one area. Because the posts have become specific, for interest groups, etc. And as a result links and references which cross boundaries of domain are fewer. Wikipedia is much better. I can start with an entry and within just a few hops, I am miles away from the first entry into maybe equally interesting topics which can take me farther (/further?) down the rabbithole.

Anyway, as the title of this post, this is more sort of a rambling. Hopefully it does not fall under the category of old man yells at cloud.
----

Talking about serendipitous discovery: As I mentioned that I read the linked article about blogs being in full bloom last night. When starting to write this post I visited the guardian website to find that article again to link to it and came across [this unrelated one](https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2024/oct/06/i-feel-i-cant-give-100-to-anything-including-my-family). I was never a fan of advice columns which it seems to be. I read only the first paragraph of the answer where they mention 70% target instead of 100%. But I think this feeling of I am doing everything in a half hearted manner is everywhere and everyone has it. Great if you don't but maybe do a mirror test to know if you or are not human- with self/ action awareness. My take is this- even if you set a goal of being 70% instead of 100% in the moment, this feeling will still be there. My way out- do a thing/ an action such that it feels that you are doing it whole-heartedly while doing it. A few seconds down the line you will get that half-heartedness feeling anyway and you may even come to regret the action. But maybe you won't.