---
title: "Short Takes 2"
toc: true
date: "2025-06-12"
last_modified_at: 2025-06-12T00:00:01-00:00
tags: 
  - thoughts
  - concepts
  - short-takes
---

In the [short-takes](/tags/#short-takes) posts I write about some concepts, phrases, models, ideas, whatever related to my work and life. As these are likely to be known to many, the idea is to just document these together, rather than go into details of these. Will keep updating.

1. ## PuLa
   There are very few people, possibly there isn't even one, who I admire as much as I admire late [PuLa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purushottam_Laxman_Deshpande).
   
   Thanks to him I got introduced to a lot of good things which have stayed long with me- from eating fish to reading Wodehouse. 
   
   An important factor is that this admiration, respect, etc. for PuLa has lived long for me. As I matured, I understood some of his shortcomings and limitations, etc. But I also appreciated some other things which I did not earlier. For example, his writing is limited to Marathi language. It is not easily translated to other cultures, languages, etc. In one speech, he himself says that humor and poetry are rooted deeply in the language in which they are written and cannot be easily lifted and shifted. So he was aware of this. Second, many of his plays (excluding 'Tuze Ahe Tujpashi') are musical comedies, lacking drama. His translations (Pygmalion to 'Ti Phulrani', Old Man And The Sea- 'Eka Koliyane') are also said to lose something in translation. On the other hand, he reworked some portions of Pickwick Papers into- deeply rooted into Marathi- the iconic 'Batatyachi Chawl'. And when he wrote about people he met in real life (Raosaheb, for example) the balance which he struck between his admiration and knowing that the person he was writing about was not perfect is just breathtaking. I started appreciating this only after a friend pointed it out to me. It is a very difficult balance to achieve. 
   
   His fine observation skills, humor, music, etc. are discussed and admired- almost worshipped- a lot. I also admire him because he worked in many areas (writing, films, music, plays, social activities, speaking truth to power, etc.) and in all these areas he did good- almost excelled. He was not always successful (the 'Subkuch PuLa' movie 'GuLaacha Ganpati', for example). But wherever he went he created a happy place. I don't know a single- a single- person who did this better than him. I am not saying he was Leonardo Da Vinci. But, anyway. In one QI episode Ronnie Ancona called [Stephen Fry a renaissance man](https://youtu.be/oSKNqpRgjq8?list=PLci687eliKhvL-_gTLB5uz07HZigy3Y_X&t=469). I think PuLa was the same.
   
   In one interview PuLa mentions that he wrote as if he was speaking to someone sitting in front of him. Because I admired his writing I also picked this way of writing to some extent (Wodehouse must have contributed, as well). And at times it is annoying. Why should I write that way when I am writing some technical notes? It makes you somewhat dependent on mostly apathetic readers. 
   
   But perhaps the thing that I admire most in him is that he was very appreciative of quality in people and things. Here by appreciative I mean he spotted, praised, and encouraged talent early on. Here are some examples, the first performance of late [Bhimsen Joshi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhimsen_Joshi) in Pune was at PuLa's place. The first letter saying 'I liked your poems' to the then unknown poet [Mahanor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namdeo_Dhondo_Mahanor) was by PuLa. He was the first to support the Dalit literature (He wrote a forward to Anand Yadav's book and told Narayan Surve that [his poem MoneyOrder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u-Y_fVYs2SA) stunned him). I may not be a people person like PuLa but I hope and strive to appreciate good things like he did.
2. ## Madeleine moment
   Also known as [involuntary memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Involuntary_memory). What was the most recent (and somewhat dramatic) Madeleine moment you experienced? I recently spent a few weekends away from city. And once saw quite a few fireflies. Some memories were triggered. But those were neither dramatic nor quite close to heart. I should meditate more.
3. ## Language and script (in entertainment)
   Language is primarily something that is spoken. Script is written. [Anurag Kashyap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anurag_Kashyap) says- [in this interview](https://youtu.be/V5M4cIeWoMQ?t=393)- that from Rangeela onwards movies started using spoken language more than language in its pure, polished form. Their (Ram Gopal Varma and Anurag Kashyap) movie Satya has long been a favorite. But I remember I didn't understand some of the language nuances and a senior friend had to explain those to me. Even now, the expletive packed language of north Indian cinema is not for me. I do use expletives. But while, for example, the raw language fits well in [Gangs of Wasseypur](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gangs_of_Wasseypur) movies, I don't like blatant use of such language everywhere. In fact, I think [Panchyat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panchayat_(TV_series)), very good as it is, would have been much better if they had minded their language. I think TVF realized it and later toned down the language in their new series Gram Chikitsalay. But whether polished or raw, language works if set [in appropriate context](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wk33wRMKa7M). Insist on pure language and you get Dharmendra's character from Chupke Chupke. (BTW, I like Amitabh's character more- 'Aap jaisi khoobsoorat ladki ko botany nahi literature lena chahiye tha', 'muz jaisa nishap, nirdosh lekin majboor character tumhein literature mein bhi nahi milega'.)
4. ## Mainstay
   Two weeks back my grandma passed away. I was not close to my dad's mother who passed away some 25 years back. But this grandma had large presence in my childhood and even in my adulthood. Caring was her dharma. She took care of everyone- particularly us grandchildren. But her way of caring was a little stressful. Mainly for her. 'Don't go outside in the rain otherwise you'll catch cold'. She never understood that once we were a little grown up, her 'the tamarind is still unripe, it will cause cough' kind of reprimands were more stressful for her than for us. And yet today right in this moment I miss it. She was irrational (the bigger the medicine tablet the stronger its effect)- irrational in the way only women of the house can be- the ones you can't talk back to. She was unwell last couple of months and when she was intermittently doing ok, she refused to eat much. I won't mention the details but when I was 15-16 years old, she caused in me one of the top paradigm shifts of my life. She was the mainstay of my grandfather's life. (Spiritual make up/ temperament wise, I am closer to my grandfather, and while I can't speak for him I think he also finds some resonance in me. And that is probably the best boast (or compliment) I made about myself.) When she fell ill and about a month back she was in hospital but one day not responding to treatment, my grandfather who is 85 and has had hip surgery and can't really walk well, went walking about without telling anyone to the farms which is about one kilometer away from home, no doubt to be/ weep alone. The next day he said to me, 'your grandma made me cry all my life' and I know he meant it with nothing but love. When my grandma died, I felt I could bear her passing away; I could stand my aunts and mother crying but I would feel sadder for my grandfather. Yet, in the last two weeks, I have shed tears for her in shower, in restaurant, while driving, while meditating and praying, and while writing this post. I will delete this post of course, but hopefully writing it will give me a closure of some sort. When someone dies an institution stops functioning. When someone old dies, the trunk is gone and family branches out. That is the way of life. But I can't bear that soon my grandma's home will no longer be grandma's home for me, that there won't be her pet cat to play with anymore. The rooms will be there but the person who combed my hair when I was 5 and treated me as if I was the most important part of her life to be cared for won't be there. She shouldn't have died.